Now that talked about forEach
and Collect, let's go ahead
and talk about the reduce
terminal operation.
This is another very
common terminal operation
that gets used with various
Java streams operations.
As before, we're
going to use reduce
in the context of
our Hamlet program.
Reduce is a terminal
operation that
returns a primitive,
unlike collect,
which as that name suggested,
returns a collection rather
than the primitive.
This particular
approach will be used
in a couple of different ways.
We're going to use
it by creating a--
first we're going to go ahead
and create a matching character
map, which is going to
be a map that associates
the names of the
Hamlet characters
with their name lengths.
So of course, Hamlet
will be length 6
and Laertes will
also be named 6 or 7,
I can't remember how
you spell Laertes.
But basically it's going
to have the lengths
in the value part of the map
and the name of the character
being the key.
What we're then going to do
is we're going to go ahead
and take the values portion
of the matching character map,
so that'll be all the lengths,
and when we say .value
on the matching character
map, that will create a data
structure that contains
all the values.
We then go ahead and
convert that list of values
into a stream of long values.
And then we're going
to go ahead and call
the reduce terminal operation.
And what the terminal
operation reduced will do is,
it's going to sum up the
lengths of all the character
names in the play Hamlet.
And that'll end up with the
sum of name lengths variable
that you see here.
Now reduce takes a
couple of parameters.
There's actually several
different overloaded variants
of reduce.
This particular version of
reduce takes two parameters.
And the first
parameter is what's
called the identity value, and
this kind of has two roles.
First, it's the initial
value of the reduction.
And it's also the default
result if there are, in fact,
no elements in the string.
So if for some reason we
ended up with a stream
with no elements
whatsoever, then we
would simply get the value 0.
We'll also talk more about
what identity is shortly.
The second parameter
that's passed in to reduce
is an accumulator,
which is designed
to be a stateless
function that combines
two values into a single,
immutable reduced value.
And by immutable,
I mean, once it's
created it's not going
to be changeable.
You can only read it, you
can't write to it or modify it.
And of course, along,
in this particular case,
is in that property.
We're not going to
write to it, we're just
going to read it once it's set.
In this particular case, we're
going to use the sum method
reference as the accumulator
because it takes two parameters
and returns a single
immutable reduced value.
We could also use a
lambda expression here.
So rather than using
sum we could also
be a bit more
verbose and write out
the code using the following
lambda expression that I show
you here, which takes two
long parameters, x and y,
and then simply adds
x plus y, and then
that's what will be
accumulated every time
the reduction takes place.
There's also, interestingly
enough, a three parameter
version of reduce.
And this is designed to be
used with parallel streams.
You wouldn't really use
it with sequential streams
you'd, use it with parallel
streams and I'll explain why
in a moment.
So what we're going to
do here again, as usual,
is we're going to generate
a list of the consistently
capitalized and sorted
names of Hamlet characters,
starting with the letter H,
Horatio, Hamlet, and so on,
and then we're going to
take that character list
and we're going to convert
it into a parallel stream.
Now I should probably
hasten to add
that converting this list
into a parallel stream
is probably overkill
because there's only
a handful of
characters in Hamlet
that start with letter
H, but this point
generalizes to other
programs that are perhaps
more suitable for paralyzation.
We then call the reduce
terminal operation.
And, as you of course know, that
will start the wheels in motion
because it's a
terminal operation.
This is another one of those
interesting streams that
basically has a factory method,
no intermediate operations,
and a terminal operation.
So we're going to go ahead and
take the list of characters,
and in parallel, we're
going to go ahead and start
with an initial value of 0.
And then this is
the accumulator,
and this is the method, this
is the behavior, if you will,
that gets run in
each of the threads
in the pool of threads
that are running
in the background in the
[INAUDIBLE] join pool.
And, as you can
see, what it does
is it starts with
the value 0, which
would be the initial
value of the sum,
and then it keeps a running sum
where we take the current sum
and we add the
length of the string,
and that becomes the new sum.
And that gets done in
the background threads.
And then after the processing
is done in the background
threads, when we reach to the--
that's the apply phase, if
you will, in the parallel
streams model.
When we get to
the combine phase,
then the reduce operation,
which in this particular case
is simply the long
sum method reference,
is used to add the various
parts back together.
There is also another way to
do this, which uses the sum
terminal operation.
So if you don't want to have to
use reduce for whatever reason,
mostly for aesthetics
because they're really
the same thing
under the hood, you
could instead write the
code this way using sum.
So sum is a terminal
operation that
basically does what reduce does
if you're going to be summing.
So in this particular
case, for this example,
we once again have
our map of characters
that correspond to the
names of Hamlet characters
and the length of their names.
We convert that into a
list of just the values.
We then turn that into a stream.
And then we call the mapToLong
intermediate operation.
If you recall, we had looked at
mapToInt in an earlier lesson.
mapToLong long is
the same basic idea,
except that rather than
mapping the input to ints,
maps it to longs,
surprise, surprise.
And so what it does
here is it maps
the stream of long
objects, which
is what we would have
had here, into a stream
of long primitives.
And the way it works
is it basically passes
in the Long::longValue factory
method that takes a long
integer and convert it
into a long primitive.
So mapToLong will then
create a stream of longs,
and then we can go ahead and sum
that stream of long primitives
into a single long result.
So not that much different.
I bet it performs pretty much
exactly the same as this code.
It just is perhaps a little
bit more obvious to look at it
that it's summing the results.
Whereas, with this
code, you have
to kind of look a little closer
and go, what is that doing?
Is it creating the product?
Is it creating the sum?
In this case, it says sum
so we without any confusion
or any ambiguity that it's in
fact doing the sum operation.
You can also,
interestingly enough,
use the collect
terminal operation
to return a primitive value.
This isn't the most
common use of collect,
but it certainly works.
And what we're going to
do in this particular case
is we're going to
call collect, which
is going to trigger the stream
processing, that's no surprise,
and then we're going to use
the summingLong collector.
So summingLong is
the factory method
to find on the Collectors
utility class that goes
ahead and creates a collector.
And this collector
will then produce
the sum of the long
value function that's
applied to all the input
elements in the stream.
So what happens there is
that the input elements
in the stream, which
of course are longs,
as in capital L-o-n-g objects,
those will then be converted
by this long value
function, long::longValue,
they'll be converted into
long primitives and then those
things will then be summed up
by the summingLong collector,
which of course, will ultimately
return a single result,
which is the sum
of name lengths,
which is a primitive law.
So hopefully that's pretty
clear from looking at the code.
As a general rule of thumb, any
of these things work just fine.
It's probably a little bit
more intuitive arguably,
to use this code than to
use this code, if you're
summing of course, or this
code, but it's up to you.
A good Java Streams
programmer should
be able to understand any of
those different approaches
that we just talked
about without having
to scratch their head too long.